November 22, 2000 FEMA Instruction 1200.1
A-1
Attachment A
Guidelines for Developing a Crisis Management Plan
A. Purpose. This document is designed to assist facility managers and
other appropriate staff in the development of local Crisis Management Plans,
as required by the FEMA Instruction on Violence in the Workplace.
B. Crisis Management Plan (CMP). The Plan should include the following:
1. The Plan should identify members of the Crisis Management
Team (CMT).

 2. The Plan should be designed to provide guidelines on minimizing
danger to employees and visitors in the event of a “traumatic” violent
incident at a FEMA facility. It should also provide guidance on how to
respond when such an incident occurs. It must be emphasized that under no
circumstances should FEMA personnel attempt to confront a violent person
with the purpose of disarming or subduing him/her, as this responsibility lies
exclusively with law enforcement officials.
3. The Plan should cover basic issues, such as who is responsible for
building security, how to obtain medical attention, role of local law
enforcement and/or the Federal Protective Service, role of employees and
supervisors, how the building should be evacuated if necessary, how
employees should contact their supervisors if cut off from the work site, how
to continue operations under unusual circumstances, identification of
resources for response to a traumatic event, how to handle accommodations
for injured employees, inventory of individuals with special skills that could
be utilized during a violent situation, and arranging for overtime pay if
needed.
 4. The Plan should be activated when an act of violence is being
committed within a FEMA facility. The Plan is a companion to the FEMA
Instruction on Violence in the Workplace. That instruction seeks to
minimize the likelihood of violence through early intervention when the
behavior of an individual demonstrates the potential for violence. 
FEMA Instruction 1200.1 November 22, 2000
A-2
 5. The Plan should be structured to make it easy for all employees to
provide assistance to other individuals during an act of violence and provide
assistance to law enforcement and emergency medical personnel who are
responding to the incident.
 6. The Plan should also include the following for use by law
enforcement and medical responders:
 a. Facility Profile. This section should include a complete
description of the facility, including floor plans, location of electrical and
telecommunications entry points, evacuation routes and an organizational
map as to where each staff is located. It should also include descriptions of
windows, doors, partitions and any other information that would be useful to
responders.
 b. Personnel Profile. This section should include current personnel
rosters with office locations and telephone numbers. It should also identify
members of the CMT and their location, and any employees who may have
collateral experience in emergency medical response or law enforcement or
other special skills that could be utilized in case of emergency.
 c. Notification. This section should clearly identify the procedures
for notifying management of the need for activation of the Plan and how the
CMT is activated. The procedure should be articulated in a fashion that will
eliminate delays due to absence of management officials or CMT members.
It should also have specific instructions on how local law enforcement
officials are notified and how best to describe what is happening during a
“911” call.
 d. Protection of Staff. This section should identify how all staff are
notified of the emergency and how the CMT functions to assist in
evacuation. This would be a site-specific section and may utilize a wide
variety of methods including telephone alert, loudspeaker announcements,
personal contact, and even coded messages via telephone or e-mail. Suggest
using the most effective means possible in order to get employees out of
danger safely and quickly.
 e. Liaison. This section should provide specific instructions on
how to communicate with arriving responders. Keep in mind that the
responders will have to view all people at the scene as potential perpetrators 
November 22, 2000 FEMA Instruction 1200.1
 A-3
until they have been clearly identified as victims. Suggest consulting with
local law enforcement officials during development of the CMP to
determine the best way for CMT members to identify themselves.
In addition, if at all possible, members of the CMT should pool their
information and attempt to verify and reconcile the information that each
one may have to ensure that the responders have the most accurate and
complete information available.

C. Crisis Management Team (CMT).
 1. A Crisis Management Team should be established at each FEMA
facility and should consist of members who are trained to respond to threats,
violent acts, or potentially violent situations through activation of the Crisis
Management Plan. The CMT is also responsible for developing the local
Crisis Management Plan for that facility.
 2. The Crisis Management Team should consist of a cross-section of
representatives with varied expertise, where possible, to include security,
supervisors, employee relations and equal opportunity staff, Employee
Assistance Program Counselor (or Stress Management Counselor), the
Alternative Dispute Resolution Officer, and union representative where a
bargaining unit exists. The Security Division and Employee and Labor
Relations Division will consult with other officials as appropriate to the
situation.
a. Headquarters. The Director, Security Division (or designated
management official of the Division) will direct the activities of the
Headquarters CMT. Members of the Response and Facility Security Branch
and contract security guard force are primary members of the Team, along
with representative from the varied areas of expertise, and union
representative, as stated in subparagraph 2 above. The Director, Deputy
Director, Chief of Staff, and Executive Associate Director, Operations
Support Directorate will be kept apprised of CMT activities, depending on
the availability of these officials.
b. Mount Weather Emergency Assistance Center. The Chief,
Deputy Chief, or Shift supervisor of the Mount Weather Police Force will
direct the activities of the Mt. Weather CMT. The CMT will consist of
members of the police force, along with representatives from the varied
areas of expertise and union representative, as stated in subparagraph 3 
FEMA Instruction 1200.1 November 22, 2000
A-4
above. Where expertise is not available onsite, representatives should be
contacted by phone for assistance. The Director or Deputy Director of the
Mount Weather Management Division will be kept apprised of CMT
activities at that location, depending on the availability of these officials.
c. National Emergency Training Center. The Assistant
Administrator for Management Operations and Student Support Safety, U.S.
Fire Administration will direct the activities of the CMT. The Safety and
Security Specialist and contract guard force are primary members of the
CMT, along with representatives from the varied areas of expertise, and
union representative, as stated in subparagraph 2 above. Where expertise is
not available onsite, representatives should be contacted by phone for
assistance. The U.S. Fire Administrator, Deputy U.S. Fire Administrator,
Chief Operating Officer of the U.S. Fire Administration, Superintendent of
the National Fire Academy, or Superintendent of the Emergency
Management Institute will be kept apprised of the CMT activities, depending
on the availability of these officials.
d. Regional Offices. The Deputy Regional Director will direct the
activities of the CMT. The CMT will consist primarily of management staff,
onsite contract guards, other designated personnel, and union representative,
where bargaining units exist. Appropriate expertise not available onsite, as
stated in subparagraph 2 above, should be contacted by phone for assistance.
The Regional Director will be kept apprised of CMT activities.
 e. Fixed Disaster Sites. The Security Specialist onsite will direct
the activities of the CMT. The CMT will consist primarily of management
staff, onsite contract guard (if available), and other designated personnel.
Appropriate expertise not available onsite, as stated in subparagraph 2
above, should be contacted by phone for assistance. The Facility Director
will be kept apprised of CMT activities.
 f. Disaster Field Offices. The Security Specialist onsite will direct
the activities of the CMT. If there is no Security Specialist, the Deputy FCO
will direct the activities of the CMT. The CMT will consist primarily of
management staff, onsite contract guard (if available), and other designated
personnel. Appropriate expertise not available onsite, as stated in
subparagraph 3 above, should be contacted by phone for assistance. The
FCO will be kept apprised of CMT activities. 
November 22, 2000 FEMA Instruction 1200.1
 A-5
 g. Other FEMA Facilities. The Director or Deputy Director of the
facility and designated personnel will comprise the CMT. At small
temporary sites it is not necessary to establish a CMT with the varied areas
of expertise as stated in subparagraph 2 above; however, appropriate
expertise should be consulted by phone, when warranted.
D. Role of Federal Protective Service Police (FPS) and Local Law
Enforcement. It is critical to define, up front, the role of the FPS and local
law enforcement officials to alleviate any misunderstandings or conflicts in
advance of an emergency situation. Each management official designated
to direct a CMT for a FEMA facility will be responsible for coordinating the
Plan with the Federal Protective Service Police and/or local law enforcement
officials, as determined appropriate. It is essential for the facility manager
and director of the CMT to know who has jurisdiction to respond in case of
an emergency at the facility.
E. Role of Supervisors and Employees. Supervisors and employees should
familiarize themselves with the procedures detailed in the Plan and the Plan
should describe their role and responsibilities, as well.
F. Procedures for Responding to Imminent Danger. Although effective
response to violence is often complex, there is a basic approach that can be
effectively used by personnel who are not trained in security or law
enforcement. For the purposes of this Plan, four easy steps are outlined
below:
1. Evaluate. When an act of violence is reported, a decision must be
made as to an appropriate course of action. The following guidelines should
be followed:
a. If an act of violence involving criminal activity has occurred and
the incident has concluded, security or law enforcement should be called.
This may require a "911" call if FEMA security staff is not on site. Under
this condition, steps 2, 3, and 4 ("Notify", "Evacuate" and "Inform") need
not be followed.
b. If an act of violence occurs and is not concluded, the CMP
should be activated and a "911" call should be made. If FEMA security staff
is on site, they should be notified first. As part of this step, members of the 
FEMA Instruction 1200.1 November 22, 2000
A-6
CMT and other employees should begin gathering information about the
incident.
2. Notify. As soon as the decision to activate the CMP has been made,
a “911” call should be made. As much information as currently available
should be shared with the “911” operator. Do not delay the call to gather
additional information. Whoever makes the call should be prepared (if safe)
to stay on the line. Other personnel should provide the caller with additional
information as available. This information can be forwarded to the “911”
operator and then to the responders.
As soon as possible, the Security Division at FEMA Headquarters should be
notified of the incident. Security staff will notify other offices with a need
to know, such as OHRM, OGC, OIG, Equal Rights, and union
representative.

 3. Evacuate. Evacuate the facility as quickly and as orderly as possible.
Do not merely sound the fire alarm. Keep in mind that normal evacuation
routes may bring personnel into dangerous areas during a violent incident.
Different routes should be considered in the CMP to safely evacuate
employees.

 4. Inform.
 a. One key to effective response to a violent incident is the accuracy
of information provided to law enforcement officials when they arrive. It is
often difficult for police officers to accurately assess the situation when
confronted with numerous conflicting reports provided by personnel
evacuating the building.
 b. To minimize conflicting reports, the CMT should serve as the
information gathering point and provide the police with as much accurate
information as possible. They should provide further assistance by
describing the physical layout of the facility and directing responders to
entrances and exits, provide telephone numbers for the area of the incident
and estimates of the number of personnel remaining in the facility and their
location.
 c. Please note that police officers arriving at the facility will not be
able to easily distinguish victims from suspects. Personnel approaching the 
November 22, 2000 FEMA Instruction 1200.1
 A-7https://github.com/STJRush/handycode
police to provide assistance should be prepared to provide identification and
follow police directions at all times.
G. Training.
 1. The Security Division will provide briefings and training for
members of the CMT on their specific responsibilities.
 2. The CMT will be responsible for briefing its employees and
managers on the CMP for their facility, so that the staff can understand the
purpose and procedures that should be followed. This will also provide an
opportunity for employees to get to know members of the CMT.
H. Approval of the Crisis Management Plan.

 1. The CMT drafts the Plan for review and concurrence by the
Facility Manager.
 2. The Plan should be forwarded to the Director of Security
for review prior to implementation, to ensure compliance with the FEMA
Violence in the Workplace program.
I. Caution. Dealing with a violent act in the workplace is a complex
task. There is no simple foolproof plan for successfully dealing with any
and all situations. The procedures outlined above are intended to provide a
set of actions designed to help bring a violent incident to a safe and rapid
conclusion.
The procedures outlined above should never be undertaken by CMT
members or other employees if, by doing so, they place themselves or others
in danger. 
